# Comparing Bioinformatics Pipelines for Analyzing Short-Read 16S rRNA Amplicon Data

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Authors and affiliations**


Petra Polakovicova<sup>1</sup>
<br>    
<sup>1</sup> Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Center for Experimental Medicine, Prague

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**General information**

In this project, we evaluated 112 different bioinformatics pipeline
configurations for processing 16S rRNA (V3-V4) amplicon sequencing
data. Using the public available data of ZymoBIOMICS Microbial
Community DNA as a reference standard, we assessed the accuracy
and consistency of taxonomic profiles generated by each pipeline. Our
results highlight the substantial variability introduced by different
analysis strategies and emphasize the importance of developing
validated and reproducible pipelines for microbiome data processing.

**Methods**

We used publicly available dataset (SRA accession number **PRJNA674596**)
containing three technical replicates of the ZymoBIOMICS Microbial
Community DNA standard (mock community). Then, we processed these reads by 112 bioinformatics pipeline configurations to compare the different results and analyze which factors change the result the most.

List of the pipeline configurations is available [here](https://xpolak37.github.io/16S_benchmark/analysis/scripts/list.html).
Final report can be found [here](https://xpolak37.github.io/16S_benchmark/analysis/scripts/mock_analysis.html).

**Results**

- Only 19% of pipelines accurately identified all taxa (F1 score = 1.0) while maintaining acceptable relative abundance (Bray-Curtis dissimilarity < 0.05). 
- The most visible factor which changed the results is the usage of various denoising tools. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


**Content**

* `analysis/data/` contains merged ASV table, taxa table and metadata for this comparative analysis
* `analysis/scripts` contains source code of the analysis



## Acknowledgment
This work was supported by MH CR – conceptual development of research organization (“Institute for
Clinical and Experimental medicine - IKEM, IN 00023001”) and COST Action CA23110 “International
networking on in vitro colon models simulating gut microbiota mediated interactions (INFOGUT).

